Doctestplus (#1521)
sherpa/sherpa: docs/developer/index.rst

The report is in ``report/index.html``, which links to individual
files and shows exactly which lines were excuted while running the tests.

> Run doctests locally

Reviewer: A question for this section. You show runs for four explicit files. Are these the only files that have been converted, or just an example set?

--------------------
If `doctestplus <https://pypi.org/project/pytest-doctestplus/>` is installed
(and it probably is because it's part of
`sphinx-astropy <https://pypi.org/project/sphinx-astropy/>`,
which is required to build the documentation locally), you can
run the the examples in the documentation or in the doctrings of individual
functions:

   pytest --doctest-plus /Users/guenther/code/sherpa/sherpa/astro/data.py
   pytest --doctest-plus /Users/guenther/code/sherpa/sherpa/data.py
   pytest --doctest-rst docs/quick.rst
   pytest --doctest-rst docs/evaluation/combine.rst

This guarantees that the examples actually work and don't have typos or outdated
parameters, which might confuse a user.

Running `pytest --doctest-plus` or `pytest --doctest-rst` (without extra parameters)
will run all usual tests and also the doctests on all files not specifically
excluded in `pytest.ini`.
If you fix examples to pass these tests, remove them from the exclusion list in
`pytest.ini`! The goal is to eventually pass on all files.

> Note: Doctests are not currently run on CI.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.. note::
   The doctests are not run as part of the CI process. The plan is to add them in once we have more experience with the system.
```

> 

Reviewer: There's currently a hidden requirement to running the doctests, and that is that the `sherpa-test-data` submodule is nistalled/activated/whatever the command is. I think this should be documented, in part because it means that users who have downloaded the code via PyPI/Zenodo/.... won't be able to run the doctests (we do have a separate way to install the test data as a pyton package *but* that is not hooked up to the doctest system, as it installs the data separately and is not something we need to bother about here yet).

A regularly-gridded 2D dataset can be created, but note that the
arguments must be flattened:

>   >>> import numpy as np

Reviewer: Here's questions I have about the testing of each "snippet":

- when do symbols have to be imported or created?
  - Imports: I assume that we don't need to do it for each test, so that this import will cover follow-up tests, but if I just had a section at the top of the page (as I do in some places) that says something like "the following examples assumes these imports ,... and then imports a bunch of modules", then we can use them in all following tests
  - symbols: if I define "foo" somewhere as a variable, is it then present for later tests?

Author: rst files are run like one big single piece of code form top to bottom. You have access to everything (imports and variables) that was defined before. There is special markup to define things in a way that doctest knows about is, but sphinx does not show it and also the possibility or a prefix (e.g. run "import numpy as np" before every file), but I have not used either of them here: https://github.com/astropy/pytest-doctestplus

  >>> x = np.asarray([1, 2, 3])
  >>> y = np.asarray([1, 2])
  >>> data = Data1D('example', x, y)
  Traceback (most recent call last):

>   ...

Reviewer: I'm not a fan of this extra noise, but what ya gonna do!

plots to be created by specifying the plot type as a list of
argumemts. For example::

>     >>> s.plot('data', 'model', 'data', 2, 'model', 2)  # doctest: +SKIP

Reviewer: Just to check: the reason for skipping this is not because we don't want to check the screen output here (which doesn't exist, but you might want to enforce this), but because this is a snippet where we haven't set up the requirements - i.e. we haven't loaded data or created models for the default id and id 2)?

That is, we have multiple reasons to skip a test.

I'm also pleased to see that the doctest comment is skipped in the output.

Author: Yes and yes. (We did not set it up and I don't want to compare the screen output). And yes, with the plugin activates, Sphinx knows about doctest and will remove that markup. The question is if there is any place where we have to worry about that for other downstream code, e.g. do we make ahelp files from rst files or docstrings?

Reviewer: The ahelp files are generated from the sherpa.astro.ui.utils docstrings (and hence sherpa.ui.utils). I'd have to check how the rst code represents such docstrings (ie how to filter them out). I think though that it would take time to get to these docstrings, as they are the most complex to do (as they hit lots of the general issues I'm talking about here as I try to understand the scope).

    >>> print(plot)
    xlo    = [2,3,5,7,8]
    xhi    = [3,5,6,8,9]
    y      = [ 6.,12., 6., 6., 6.]
    xlabel = x
    ylabel = y
    title  = Model

>     histo_prefs = {'xerrorbars': False, 'yerrorbars': False, ..., 'linecolor': None}

Reviewer: Hmm. dictionary ordering has calmed down from earlier python versions, so I think it's now safe to assume a given order.

Author: Yes. Always in insertion order now.

Reviewer: Of course, the way we create any particular dict could change for a variety of reasons, so we may see changes over time (and would have to think about at that time).

Does doctest treat

    {'a': False, 'b': True}
    {'b': True, 'a': False}

the same? For the line highlighted here it may be hard to check since we elide some of the keys, so it would be hard to check.

Author: Doctest performs a string comparison of the output. So, two identical dicts can fail if printed in different order. Luckily, now the order of dict items is deterministic in Python, as long as they are generated in a deterministic fashion (which they are for this case). Again, it's a trade-off: Do we want to made doctest happy? Is it worth the extra work or should we just ignore this test or entire output line? Or should we take the fact that the output line is super-long (> 300 characters I think) as a sign that the output is not great to begin with an should be changed?

It's something I don't have a good feeling for yet, but that we'll get experience with as we develop this further. 

In some instances, it might be useful to write code that does not depend on the order e.g. `print(histoprefs['xlog'])` as an example what's in there instead of `print(histoprefs)` or `print(sorted(histroprefs))`; in others we want to show the users how the entire dict looks when printed on screen and then it might be better to just not check that output.

First priority of a docstring should be that it's useful for the reader (which means it's also correct and executes without error). Using it as unit test is a lower priority to me, but does not hurt if we can get it to work with minimal extra effort and without reducing the usefulness of the docs for the reader.
